Random Beacon v2 README (#2746)
keep-network/keep-core: solidity/random-beacon/README.adoc

= Keep Random Beacon v2

The Keep Network requires a trusted source of randomness for the process of

> trustless group election. While the network requires that randomness to function

Author: https://github.com/keep-network/keep-core/pull/2746/commits/80f16897fe14305ae1a2aaf52b5352694349c718

correctly, the source of randomness is itself broadly applicable. This trusted
source of randomness takes the form of a BLS Threshold Relay.

== Overview

The threshold relay is a way of generating verifiable randomness that is
resistant to bad actors both in the relay network and on the anchoring Ethereum
blockchain. The basic functioning of the relay is:

- Some number of groups exist in the relay.
- An arbitrary seed value `v_s` counts as the first entry in the relay.
- A request `r_i` is dispatched to the chain for a new entry.
- The previous entry `v_s` is used to choose a group to produce the response to
  the request.
- `v_s` is signed by at least a subset of the chosen group members, and the
  resulting signature is the entry generated in response to the request. It is
  published to the anchoring blockchain as the entry `v_i`.
- The new entry `v_i` may trigger the formation of a new group from the set of
  all members in the relay.
- A group expires after a certain amount of time.

== Prior Work

Smart contracts for the first version of the random beacon are available in

> link:./../../solidity-v1[`solidity-v1` directory]. The new version uses the same

Reviewer: Maybe it will be better to link to `https://github.com/keep-network/keep-core/tree/main/solidity-v1` instead a relative path, as if we publish this README inside a NPM package the path won't resolve.

Author: Good point, will do!

Author: https://github.com/keep-network/keep-core/pull/2746/commits/80f16897fe14305ae1a2aaf52b5352694349c718

approach for BLS signatures as v1 but replaces ticket-based group selection with
an optimistic sortition pool call. It also redesigns staker rewards and offers
a more operator-friendly approach for relay entry timeouts. Last but not least,

> most parameters for the relay are now governable. 

Author: What upgradeability? We do not have one now 😆 

`RandomBeacon` will have to be upgradeable as a whole in TBTC Bridge contract.

> most parameters for the relay are now governable. 

Reviewer: It's always a kind of upgradeability 😜

== The Mechanism

=== Group Creation

New groups are created with a fixed, governable frequency of relay requests.
Instead of a v1 ticket-based approach for group selection, we use sortition
pool. Group creation start transaction is embedded into relay request
transaction and locks a sortition pool. From this moment, no operator can enter
or leave the pool. Once a new relay entry appears on the chain, all off-chain
clients perform group selection optimistically calling
`RandomBeacon.selectGroup(seed)` view function for free. Seed is available in
`DkgStarted` event emitted when the group creation starts. After determining
group members, clients should perform off-chain distributed key generation (DKG).

> Selected group member submits the result to the chain calling

Author: https://github.com/keep-network/keep-core/pull/2746/commits/318d50a835e8c0c171305757303cfc5ffba3f48d

`RandomBeacon.submitDkgResult(DKG.Result calldata dkgResult)` function. Once the
result is submitted, a challenge period starts.

During the challenge period, anyone can notify that the submitted DKG result is
malicious calling `RandomBeacon.challengeDkgResult(DKG.Result calldata dkgResult)`
function. Malicious DKG result may contain corrupted data, group members not
selected by the pool, or incorrect supporting signatures. If such malicious
result is submitted and challenged, the result submitter gets slashed and the
malicious result is immediately discarded. The length of the challenge period
and slashing amount are governable parameters.

> Once the challenge period passes, DKG result submitter should unlock the

Author: https://github.com/keep-network/keep-core/pull/2746/commits/318d50a835e8c0c171305757303cfc5ffba3f48d

sortition pool and mark the DKG result as accepted calling
`RandomBeacon.approveDkgResult(DKG.Result calldata dkgResult)` to receive a
reward. In case the submitter does not call the approve function within a

> specific number of blocks (governable value), anyone can do that and receive the

Author: https://github.com/keep-network/keep-core/pull/2746/commits/318d50a835e8c0c171305757303cfc5ffba3f48d

submitter's reward as described in <<fees-and-rewards,Fees and Rewards>> section.

There is a timeout before which DKG result should be submitted. The timeout
equals the group size multiplied by the number of blocks for a member to become
eligible to submit DKG result. The timer starts at the moment when the first
member becomes eligible.

In case the DKG result was not submitted before a timeout, anyone can notify DKG
timed out calling `RandomBeacon.notifyDkgTimeout()` and receive a reward, as
described in <<fees-and-rewards,Fees and Rewards>> section. DKG timeout includes
the situation when no new relay entry was produced and sortition could not be
performed.

The sortition pool weights operators by their authorized stake amount and allows
selecting the same operator multiple times. Off-chain DKG protocol executes in
the same way as for v1 and inactive/disqualified members during the off-chain
protocol are marked as ineligible for rewards for a certain, governable, period
of time when DKG result is approved.

Each group created in the system remains active for a certain, governable period

> of time. Group that expired is no longer selected for any new work and group is

Author: https://github.com/keep-network/keep-core/pull/2746/commits/318d50a835e8c0c171305757303cfc5ffba3f48d

> handled in the relay request transaction.

Author: I meant "and group expiration is handled...". I'll fix it.

> handled in the relay request transaction.

Author: https://github.com/keep-network/keep-core/pull/2746/commits/318d50a835e8c0c171305757303cfc5ffba3f48d

notifier's reward. The function unlocks the sortition pool and clears up DKG
data but no slashing for DKG timeout is executed and no one is losing any
rewards.

[[fees-and-rewards]]
=== Fees and Rewards

Relay requester should provide a fee in T. The value of the fee is a governable
parameter. The entire fee is deposited in the DKG rewards pool that is used to
reimburse for different actions related to DKG.

There is a fixed, governable reward for submitting and approving (after the
challenge period!) DKG result paid from the DKG rewards pool. The reward is paid
to the DKG result submitter in the transaction approving the DKG result. If the
DKG result submitter failed to approve the result after the challenge period,
anyone can do that and receive the submitter's reward.

The logic triggering new group selection is embedded in relay request
transaction and is as cheap as possible, so no additional reward is paid for
triggering DKG.

In case the DKG result has not been submitted on time, anyone can unlock the
pool and receive a fixed, governable reward for reporting DKG timeout. The
reward is paid from the DKG reward pool. 

> The order in which operators are supposed to submit DKG result is enforced

Author: I was thinking about it but the fact the order is enforced for DKG is strictly related to the reward described in this section. I'd leave it as-is, the eligibility feels like a too-low-level detail to have a separate section IMO.

> The order in which operators are supposed to submit DKG result is enforced

Reviewer: I'm just the kind of guy who prefers splitting long blocks of text into subsections to quickly find what I want and skip irrelevant parts. Call me impatient or lazy 🤷🏻

> The order in which operators are supposed to submit DKG result is enforced

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The order in which operators are supposed to submit a DKG result is enforced
```

Anyone can request for a new relay entry (random number) calling
`RandomBeacon.requestRelayEntry(IRandomBeaconConsumer callbackContract)`
function and providing an optional callback parameter. The requester needs to
approve enough tokens for a fee, as described in
<<fees-and-rewards,Fees and Rewards>> section.

In `requestRelayEntry` transaction, groups that reached their maximum lifetime
are getting expired and one of the remaining active groups is tasked with
producing a new relay entry. All off-chain clients are expected to react to
`RelayEntryRequested` event and check if a group they are a member of has been
tasked with producing a new relay entry. If so, they should start off-chain
protocol to sign the previous relay entry producing a new relay entry this way.

Off-chain clients are expected to follow the order when submitting relay entry
to minimize and distribute costs evenly, as described in
<<fees-and-rewards,Fees and Rewards>> section but no ordering is enforced
on-chain. New relay entry should be submitted using 
`RandomBeaocn.submitRelayEntry(bytes calldata entry)`
function.

=== Callbacks

Random Beacon supports simple, low gas budget callbacks from a relay entry

> submit transaction with a gas limit being a governable parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
submit a transaction with a gas limit being a governable parameter.
```

`IRandomBeaconConsumer` interface that should be called when a new relay entry
is submitted to the chain.

```
interface IRandomBeaconConsumer {
    /// @notice Receives relay entry produced by Keep Random Beacon. This function
    /// should be called only by Keep Random Beacon.
    ///
    /// @param relayEntry Relay entry (random number) produced by Keep Random
    ///                   Beacon.
    /// @param blockNumber Block number at which the relay entry was submitted
    ///                    to the chain.
    function __beaconCallback(uint256 relayEntry, uint256 blockNumber) external;
}
```

=== Timeouts

There are two timeouts for a relay entry to be provided by a group: soft timeout
and hard timeout.

The soft timeout is the group size multiplied by the number of blocks for a
member to become eligible to submit relay entry. Eligibility is not enforced
on-chain but off-chain clients are expected to agree and follow it.

If no entry was provided within the soft timeout, all operators in the group
start bleeding and losing their stake. The bleeding increases linearly from 0 to
the governable slashing amount per operator over time, until the hard timeout is

> reached or until relay entry is submitted by the group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reached or until a relay entry is submitted by the group.
```

> The time for a single group member to become eligible to submit result and the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The time for a single group member to become eligible to submit a result and the
```

> hard relay entry timeout are governable parameters. This gives a chance to start

Author: I would appreciate another PR after this one is merged with this list.

> hard relay entry timeout are governable parameters. This gives a chance to start

Reviewer: https://github.com/keep-network/keep-core/pull/2751

with more forgiving penalties and increase them over time. In general, the
slashing penalty should be proportional to rewards and the frequency of relay
requests and associated risk.

When the hard timeout is reached, anyone can notify about this fact by calling
`RandomBeacon.reportRelayEntryTimeout()` function and receiving a notifier
reward. The group which failed to submit a relay entry is terminated, group
members are slashed, and if there are still active groups in the beacon, another
group is selected and tasked with producing relay entry for the given relay
request. 

There is a governable timeout for DKG to complete and for the result to be
submitted. DKG timeout includes the time it takes to execute off-chain protocol

> to generate a key, and the time it takes for all group members to become
> eligible to submit the result and failing to do so. Note that unlike in the case

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to generate a key, and the time it takes for all group members to become
eligible to submit the result. Note that unlike in the case
```

of relay entry, `RandomBeacon.submitDkgResult(DKG.Result calldata dkgResult)`
function enforces the eligibility of submitters on-chain. When DKG timeout is
hit, anyone can call `RandomBeacon.notifyDkgTimeout()` function and receive the
notifier's reward. The function unlocks the sortition pool and clears up DKG
data but no slashing for DKG timeout is executed and no one is losing any
rewards.

[[fees-and-rewards]]
=== Fees and Rewards

Relay requester should provide a fee in T. The value of the fee is a governable
parameter. The entire fee is deposited in the DKG rewards pool that is used to
reimburse for different actions related to DKG.

> There is a fixed, governable reward for submitting and approving (after the
> challenge period!) DKG result paid from the DKG rewards pool. The reward is paid

Reviewer: I don't find this interjection necessary.

```suggestion
There is a fixed, governable reward for submitting and approving
a DKG result paid from the DKG rewards pool. The reward is paid
```

to the DKG result submitter in the transaction approving the DKG result. If the
DKG result submitter failed to approve the result after the challenge period,

> anyone can do that and receive the submitter's reward.

Reviewer: So the reward is paid to the DKG submitter or to the caller of the approve function?
But maybe describing it this way is more clear.

Author: The caller but DKG submitter is expected to be the caller of this function. Only the DKG result submitter can initially call it. If they do not, after a certain number of blocks, anyone can do that and claim the reward.

The logic triggering new group selection is embedded in relay request
transaction and is as cheap as possible, so no additional reward is paid for
triggering DKG.

In case the DKG result has not been submitted on time, anyone can unlock the
pool and receive a fixed, governable reward for reporting DKG timeout. The
reward is paid from the DKG reward pool. 

The order in which operators are supposed to submit DKG result is enforced

> on-chain. The first member eligible to submit the DKG result is a member with
> index `hash(new_group_pubkey) % group_size`, then also
> `(hash(new_group_pubkey) % group_size) + 1`. For example, if

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on-chain. The first member eligible to submit the DKG result is a member with
index `keccak256(new_group_pubkey) % group_size`. Then after a governable result
submission eligibility delays, members with subsequent indexes are becoming
eligible one after another. For example, if
```

> index `hash(new_group_pubkey) % group_size`, then also
> `(hash(new_group_pubkey) % group_size) + 1`. For example, if
> `hash(new_group_pubkey) % group_size = 62`, `group_size = 64`, group members are

Reviewer: Let's be specific about hashing function type.
```suggestion
index `keccak256(new_group_pubkey) % group_size`, then also
`(keccak256(new_group_pubkey) % group_size) + 1`. For example, if
`keccak256(new_group_pubkey) % group_size = 62`, `group_size = 64`, group members are
```

becoming eligible in the following order:
`62, 63, 64, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, ..., 61`. Governance needs to ensure
that both the frequency of relay requests with which a new DKG starts and the
fee for a single request make DKG result submitter reward attractive enough so
that no one wants to bail out from submitting the result.

The transaction submitting relay entry is not reimbursable and implementation
ensures the gas cost of this transaction is as low as possible, below 200k gas
when no callback is executed.

Everyone is eligible to submit relay entry at any time but off-chain clients are
expected to agree and follow the following order to minimize the gas cost and
distribute costs: the first group member eligible to submit the result is

> `new_entry MOD group_size`; then, if the selected member does not provide entry

Reviewer: For DKG eligibility we used `%` in the calculation, here we use `MOD`. Let's be consistent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`new_entry MOD group_size`; then, if the selected member does not provide an entry
```

within the governable eligibility period, `(new_entry MOD group_size) + 1` and
so on.

If some group members are notoriously ignoring their duty, the group can vote on

> failed heartbeat notification for these operators - more on that in the
> <<heartbeats,Heartbeats>> section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
failed <<heartbeats,heartbeat>> notification for these operators.
```

> T rewards will be distributed continuously to all operators in the beacon
> sortition pool, excluding operators who were marked as ineligible for rewards
> due to failing the heartbeat. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
T rewards will be distributed continuously to all operators registered in the beacon
sortition pool, excluding operators who were marked as ineligible for rewards
due to failing the heartbeat. 
```

[[heartbeats]]
=== Heartbeats

Off-chain clients are free to execute any heartbeat protocol they want to ensure
group members are alive and nodes are operating properly. One example is signing
some piece of information every nth blocks and first making sure this piece of
information can not be used for `RandomBeacon.reportUnauthorizedSigning()` -
that is, that the signed information can not become `msg.sender` for

> `reportUnauthorizedSigning` call.

Reviewer: Do we need to provide an example here? We can describe an actual protocol after we implement it in the client.

Author: This is a very important requirement, I think it should stay here.

Reviewer: OK! I just polished it up a little fd257907e783087729fd78454329a817defdac39

> Group members are free to choose together which members failed the heartbeat and
> sign failed heartbeat claim. If the required threshold of group members signed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Group members can agree upon members that failed the heartbeat and
issue a heartbeat failure claim. If the required threshold of group members signed
```

the heartbeat failure claim, they can submit it to
`RandomBeacon.notifyFailedHeartbeat(Heartbeat.FailureClaim calldata claim, uint256 nonce)`
function and have the group members who failed the heartbeat excluded from

> sortition pool rewards for a governable time period. The submitter of the failed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the sortition pool rewards for a governable time period. The submitter of the failed
```

heartbeat claim receives a reward from a separate notifier reward pool, funded
by DAO  for heartbeat failure claims specifically. This pool is expected to be

> funded by DAO from tokens saved from sortition pool rewards as a result of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
funded by DAO with tokens saved from sortition pool rewards as a result of
```

> having some operators marked as ineligible for rewards due to failing a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
having operators marked as ineligible for rewards due to failing a
```

heartbeat.

This approach is theoretically susceptible to group members colluding together
but because a reasonably high number of operators is needed to sign a claim and
operators signing the claim other than the submitter receive nothing in return,
we consider this approach safe and good enough. An important advantage of this
approach is that honest players can decide off-chain when it makes sense to
submit a heartbeat fail report and mark someone as ineligible for rewards. For
example, marking an operator ineligible for rewards for the next two weeks have
a higher impact than prolonging reward ineligibility for 10 minutes for an
operator that was already marked as ineligible for rewards. This approach does
not increase the gas cost of a happy path and leaves some freedom to group
members. They may mark as ineligible operators who turned off their nodes,
operators whose nodes never participate in signing because they are
misconfigured, or operators who notoriously miss their turn in submitting relay
entry.

> 

Reviewer: In the future would be awesome to create a graph visualizing all the paths implemented in the contracts we described above in this document.

== Build

Random beacon contracts use https://hardhat.org/[*Hardhat*] development
environment. To build and deploy these contracts, please follow the instructions
presented below.

=== Prerequisites

Please make sure you have the following prerequisites installed on your machine:

> - https://nodejs.org[Node.js] >12.22.1

Reviewer: Let's go with at least v14.

of time. A group that expired is no longer selected for any new work. Group
expiration is performed in the relay request transaction.

=== Relay Request and Relay Entry

Anyone can request a new relay entry (random number) by calling
`RandomBeacon.requestRelayEntry(IRandomBeaconConsumer callbackContract)`
function and providing an optional callback parameter. The requester needs to
approve enough tokens for a fee, as described in
<<fees-and-rewards,Fees and Rewards>> section.

In `requestRelayEntry` transaction, groups that reached their maximum lifetime
are getting expired and one of the remaining active groups is tasked with
producing a new relay entry. The off-chain clients are expected to monitor the
`RelayEntryRequested` event. If a client is a part of a picked group they should
start the off-chain protocol to sign the previous relay entry producing a new one.

Off-chain clients are expected to follow the order when submitting relay entry
to minimize and distribute costs evenly, as described in
<<fees-and-rewards,Fees and Rewards>> section but no ordering is enforced
on-chain. New relay entry should be submitted using 

> `RandomBeaocn.submitRelayEntry(bytes calldata entry)`

Reviewer 2: RandomBeaocn -> RandomBeacon

Reviewer: cf87b67e3d6ef59dfd1b5263c1f62d3b0204b873

function.

=== Callbacks

Random Beacon supports simple, low gas budget callbacks from a relay entry
submit a transaction with a gas limit being a governable parameter.

> 

Reviewer 2: Two blank lines.

Author: https://github.com/keep-network/keep-core/pull/2746/commits/e156cf8d6ad16d3cdb3879d940d9a59a6eee16db

}
```

=== Timeouts

There are two timeouts for a relay entry to be provided by a group: soft timeout
and hard timeout.

==== Soft Relay Entry Timeout

The soft timeout is the group size multiplied by the number of blocks for a
member to become eligible to submit a relay entry. Eligibility is not enforced
on-chain but off-chain clients are expected to agree and follow it.

If no entry was provided within the soft timeout, all operators in the group
start bleeding and losing their stake. The bleeding increases linearly from 0 to
the governable slashing amount per operator over time, until the hard timeout is
reached or until a relay entry is submitted by the group.

The time for a single group member to become eligible to submit a result and the
hard relay entry timeout are governable parameters. This gives a chance to start
with more forgiving penalties and increase them over time. In general, the
slashing penalty should be proportional to rewards and the frequency of relay
requests and associated risk.

==== Hard Relay Entry Timeout

When the hard timeout is reached, anyone can notify about this fact by calling

> `RandomBeacon.reportRelayEntryTimeout()` function and receiving a notifier

Reviewer 2: anyone can notify ... and receiving  -> anyone can notify ... and receive

Reviewer: cf87b67e3d6ef59dfd1b5263c1f62d3b0204b873

T rewards will be distributed continuously to all operators registered in the beacon
sortition pool, excluding operators who were marked as ineligible for rewards
due to failing the heartbeat.

[[heartbeats]]
=== Heartbeats

Off-chain clients are free to execute any heartbeat protocol they want to ensure
group members are alive and nodes are operating properly.

[TIP]
One example of a heartbeat protocol is signing some piece of information every
nth blocks and first making sure the information cannot be used for
`RandomBeacon.reportUnauthorizedSigning()`, that is, the signed information can
not become `msg.sender` for `reportUnauthorizedSigning` call.

Group members can agree upon members that failed the heartbeat and issue a
heartbeat failure claim. If the required threshold of group members signed
the heartbeat failure claim, they can submit it to
`RandomBeacon.notifyFailedHeartbeat(Heartbeat.FailureClaim calldata claim, uint256 nonce)`
function and have the group members who failed the heartbeat excluded from
the sortition pool rewards for a governable time period.

The submitter of the failed heartbeat claim receives a reward from a separate

> notifier reward pool, funded by DAO  for heartbeat failure claims specifically.

Reviewer 2: double space between "DAO" and "for"

Author: https://github.com/keep-network/keep-core/pull/2746/commits/e156cf8d6ad16d3cdb3879d940d9a59a6eee16db
